---
sidebar_quote: |-
  There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
  Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.
sidebar_quote_attribution: 'Hamlet (I, v, 166–167)'
---

# GW1509014: LIGO Detects Gravitational Waves

On 14 September 2015 at 4:50:45 AM Eastern standard time, [LIGO detected its first gravitational
waves](https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102).  The waves descended on Earth from
the southern hemisphere, passed through the Earth, and emerged at the Earth's surface first at the
LIGO interferometer in Livingston, Louisiana, and then, 7 milliseconds later, at the LIGO
interferometer in Hanford, Washington (shown below).

![View of LIGO Hanford from above]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/gw150914/hanford.png){:height="203px" width="600px"}

At each L-shaped interferometer, the waves lengthened one arm of the L, pushing apart mirrors at the
arm's ends by about one part in 10<sup>21</sup>, which translates into one thousandth the diameter
of a proton.  Simultaneously it shortened the other arm by the same amount, and then the lengthening
and shortening oscillated about twelve times before dying out.  The waves had passed.

A laser beam bouncing between the mirrors sensed these exquisitely tiny motions and fed its signal
into a photodiode, which converted the signal from light into electric current.  The current flowed
through carefully designed amplifiers and circuits and then into a computer, which registered the
signal and sent it through an automated data analysis program. That program produced these images,
placing them on an internal LIGO website for all the scientists in the LIGO Scientific Collaboration
(LSC) to see. [Note: this and the next figure are based on Figures 1 and 2 in the [journal
article](https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102) reporting this discovery.]

![Plot of signal power as a function of time and frequency in GW150914]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/gw150914/timefrequency.png){:height="205px" width="600px"}

Word spread very quickly among the thousand LSC members and several hundred members of the European
Virgo gravitational wave collaboration, which participates in the analysis of LIGO's data.  The
event was eventually given the formal name <strong>GW150914</strong>.

These pictures show the frequency of oscillation of the LIGO mirrors, plotted upward, as a function
of time plotted horizontally. The mirrors are all the time oscillating just a little bit at all
frequencies due to noise.  The colors show the strength of the oscillation.  Blue represents noise,
green represents oscillations that are strong enough to likely be due to a gravitational wave, and
yellow represents a very strong oscillation. At both Hanford and Livingston, the green-yellow
oscillations have precisely the form that we expect for gravitational waves produced by two heavy,
compact objects (black holes or neutron stars)—a compact binary—spiraling together and colliding.

The waves "chirp" upward in frequency, as time passes, in this case from about 40 Hertz (40 cycles
per second) to about 260 Hertz.  The signal is amazingly strong; far stronger than anyone expected
for LIGO's first gravitational wave detection. And these signal shapes were identical at the two
LIGO sites.

## The gravitational waveform and the nature of its source

The signal was so strong that, when the scientists looked, they could see it by eye when they
plotted the stretching and squeezing—the <i>waveform</i>—as a function of time. This was truly
unexpected: the scientists had expected to have to pull their first signal out of the noise using
sophisticated data analysis techniques, based in part on numerical relativity simulations. And the
waveforms were the same at the two LIGO sites, aside from residual noise. The top two graphs below,
based on Fig. 1 in the journal article reporting the discovery, show the gravitational-wave signals
that LIGO saw.

![Plots of observed and simulated signals]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/gw150914/observedwaves.png){:height="313px" width="600px"}

To check to be sure that this was really a gravitational wave, the LSC/Virgo scientists extracted
the incoming signal from the instrument's noise, as best they could, and they compared it with with
theoretical waveforms for compact binaries that have been generated by the SXS collaboration. The
observed waveforms, at the two sites, are shown in grey in the lower panels of the above figure. The
width of the grey curves represent the uncertainty in the observed waveform, due to the noise. The
red and blue curves represent the SXS waveform that best fits the observed waveform.
 
The fit is beautiful. It tells us that the source of the gravitational waveform was a pair of black
holes, spiraling together, colliding, and merging into a single black hole, with one hole 36 times
heavier than the sun, the other 29 times heavier than the sun, and the final hole 62 times heavier
than the sun. The change from 29+36=65 solar masses to 62 solar masses tells us that the
gravitational waves carried away three solar masses of energy.  It is as though all the mass in
three suns had been converted into pure energy and deposited into the gravitational waves! And from
the SXS simulation, we learn that during the very brief collision itself, the power (the energy per
unit time) being injected into the gravitational waves was greater than the total power emitted by
all the stars in the universe put together.  This is truly the most powerful event ever observed by
humans, aside from the big bang birth of the universe itself.


## Movies from computer simulations motivated by GW150914

The following are movies from computer simulations, made using the [Spectral Einstein Code
(SpEC)](black-holes.org/SpEC.html).  The simulations show a model of the colliding black holes that
produced GW150914.

### Lensed black holes

{% include youtube-embed.html id="Zt8Z_uzG71o" %}

Advanced LIGO saw gravitational waves from two black holes that merged over a billion light years
from Earth. This computer simulation shows (in slow motion) what this would look like up close. If
this movie were played back in real time, it would last for about one third of a second.

In this movie, the black holes are near us, in front of a sky filled with stars and gas and
dust. The black regions are the shadows of the two black holes: no light would reach us from these
areas. Light from each star or bit of gas or dust travels to our eyes along paths (light rays) that
are greatly bent by the holes' gravity and by their warped spacetime. This is called "gravitational
lensing." Because of this gravitational lensing, the pattern of stellar and gas/dust images changes
in fascinating ways, as the black holes orbit each other, then collide and merge.

The ring around the black holes, known as an "Einstein ring," arises from all the stars in a small
region directly behind the holes; gravitational lensing smears their images into the shape of a
ring.

The gravitational waves themselves would not be seen by a human near the black holes (though they
would be felt!) and so do not show in this video, with one important exception: The gravitational
waves that are traveling outward toward the small region behind the black holes disturb that
region’s stellar images in the Einstein ring, causing them to slosh around in the ring, even long
after the collision. The gravitational waves traveling in other directions cause weaker, and
shorter-lived sloshing, everywhere outside the Einstein ring.

### Rotating fields

{% include youtube-embed.html id="kkKDs59zcdI" %}

Numerical simulation of two inspiraling black holes that merge to form a new black hole. Shown are
the black hole horizons, the strong gravitational field surrounding the black holes, and the
gravitational waves produced.

At the beginning, the visualization shows the two black holes from a distance of approx. 30,000
kilometers. The gravitational waves are depicted in orange. The black holes are surrounded by a
strong gravitational field, which is visible more clearly when we zoom in. The strength of the
gravitational field decreases from the inside (green) towards the outside (red). When we zoom out,
the gravitational waves are visible again. The pale orange structures now appearing represent the
very strong gravitational waves that are emitted along the rotational axis (perpendicular to the
orbit). At the end the two black holes merge. We see the resulting black hole and the strong
gravitational field (no waves).

### Spacetime geometry

{% include youtube-embed.html id="c-2XIuNFgD0" %}

This movie shows the inspiral and merger of two black holes comparable to GW150914. Shown are the
horizons of the black holes as black spheres, and a representation of the warped space-time geometry
as the colored surface. One hemisphere of the black hole horizons is colored, highlighting the
change of rotation axis during the inspiral. The height of the colored surface illustrates curvature
of space, the colors from red to green indicate how much time is slowed down near black holes, and
the blue and purple colors at larger distance show gravitational waves propagating away.

### A wide view

{% include youtube-embed.html id="ZD4TXK4wQgU" %}

A computer simulation of the gravitational waves from the merging black holes that LIGO
observed. Our three-dimensional space is shown as a two-dimensional surface, with one dimension
removed. The black holes’ strong gravity curves the space near them into funnel shapes. As the black
holes spiral together and merge into one, gravitational waves ripple outward. The movie is shown in
slow motion, about 40 times slower than real time.

### Focus on the nearby waves

{% include youtube-embed.html id="YnCccVDpmrw" %}

The simulation shows the gravitational waves produced by two orbiting black holes. The strength of
the gravitational wave is indicated by elevation as well as colour, with dark red indicating weak
fields and pale yellow indicating strong fields. The yellow tubes show cross sections of the past
location and shape of the black holes as they spiral towards each other. The movie shows the process
in slow motion: For two black holes with about 29 and 36 solar masses, the whole animation would
last approximately 1 second from beginning to end and the frequency of the gravitational waves would
start from 19 Hz (just below the human audible range) and increase as the black holes approach each
other.

### The mid range

{% include youtube-embed.html id="157rfAqypcc" %}

This video depicts the birth, 1.3 billion years ago, of the gravitational waves that LIGO discovered
on 14 September 2015. The waves are generated by two black holes that spiral around each other, then
collide and merge. In the bright green regions, the waves stretch space; in the dark green regions,
they squeeze space. As the black holes near each other, the waves get stronger and the separation
between them gets shorter, giving rise to a “chirp”. The two black holes collide and merge into a
new black hole, bringing the waves to a crescendo. The newborn black hole vibrates briefly, then
becomes quiet and stops generating waves. The waves depart from the hole’s vicinity, traveling out
into the universe, carrying news of the black holes’ collision. This movie is in slow motion; if it
were played back in real time, it would last for only 2/3 of a second.


For even more videos, see our [GW150914 YouTube playlist](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLLZ9goBDt4Z9AbZQClE1FsH9xflGdByec)!
