---
order: 2
title: A Totally New Kind of Astronomy
subtitle: A different perspective on the universe
---

In the rich, velvety darkness of prehistoric night, humans no doubt gazed up at the starry sky in
awe at its sublime beauty and mystery. Simple human nature led them to wonder why such gorgeous
lights appeared above, and moved as they did. As cultures developed, complex mythological systems
were created in an imaginative effort to explain the existence and movements of those heavenly
bodies. Burgeoning civilizations created the need for accurate time keeping. Ancient people turned
to the sky to fill that need. Gradually, science began to come into the picture. Imagination and
fables gave way to investigation and facts, bringing ever more marvelous wonders, and new mystery.

When Galileo Galilei first turned a primitive telescope to the sky in 1609 he saw things no human
had ever seen before, like the four largest moons of Jupiter. Modern astronomers have developed new
types of telescopes that detect all sorts of electromagnetic waves — gamma rays, X-Rays,
ultraviolet, infrared, microwaves, and radio, as well as visible light. They've even developed
instruments that allow them to watch as other types of particles — such as cosmic rays and neutrinos
— stream toward us from the most distant reaches of the cosmos.

Using these techniques, astronomers have discovered that our Universe is 80 billion trillion miles
across, with hundreds of billions of galaxies, and hundreds of billions of stars like our own Sun in
each of those galaxies. Before modern astronomy, the height of human knowledge of the Universe
claimed that the Earth was flat, and the Sun carried across the nearby shell of the sky on a golden
chariot. Now, we know the breathtaking extent of the Cosmos, and have a far more sophisticated
understanding of its astounding processes.

The development of astronomy has led an expansion of human knowledge reaching out, ever farther from
our home. Yet this growth in our understanding is limited by our tools. The limits are familiar to
us. Light cannot be used to see through objects. Although certain “colors” can penetrate objects
better than others — like X-Rays through our bodies — there is always a limit. Light can always be
absorbed, which means that certain things will always be hidden to us if we only use light. Some of
the most interesting events in the Universe lie hidden behind an impenetrable veil of dust and other
scattered light. In fact, for the first million years after the Big Bang, all of the matter in the
Universe was so hot it glowed, and light could barely travel anywhere. If astronomers want to see
the Universe much before this time, they can't use any type of telescope used before.

Gravitational-wave detectors fit the bill nicely. Unlike light, gravitational waves are not stopped
by dust — or even stars and planets. In fact, when two neutron stars collide, a standard telescope
would only see what happens on the surfaces of the stars or above. A gravitational-wave detector, on
the other hand, would be able to peer into the very center of the collision — where the most
mysterious events are happening. Of course, detecting gravitational waves is enormously challenging,
and will require an extraordinary triumph of science and engineering. Fortunately, that triumph is
at hand.
